  
## Expectations
From this Fellow’s experience with the program, expectations and roles vary greatly amongst the different Fellows who pass through the program. It is best to discuss, early on, with the directors of your program to best understand the goals that they have in mind, as well as to convey what you personally hope to seek from the program. Regardless of your focus, communication of your role within Microsoft is beneficial to both Microsoft in terms of broadcasting TCE’s mission and yourself. Personal gain can be had in the form of additional contacts, expanding your professional network, as well as creating opportunities for dialogue with regards to your work. Such discussions are both beneficial in terms of acting as a foil, shining new light on current endeavors as well as creating potential for future suggestions and direction on your project. If you are a Fellow in the Microsoft program, you likely have been engaged already in the civic technology field. If so, continuing with the enthusiasm that brought you to Microsoft in the first place will provide shine both yourself and Microsoft in the best light during your tenure. If you have not had prior experience in the civic technology space, then welcome. A plethora of resources are available to new individuals interested in the field, and Microsoft is a great jumping point from which to access them. At the New York branch of TCE in particular, Civic Hall is an amazing resource. This is where the New York program is based out of and where most major civic tech events, from Code for America’s local New York brigade (discussed in detail in the below) to events such as Fast Company’s Innovation Week. The directors at the New York branch, John Paul Farmer and Matt Stempeck are well connected and able to give you access to a myriad of civic-minded tech events happening throughout the city. Be sure to be open to these events and use your time at Microsoft to attend as many as possible, from NY Tech Meetup to NYC Big Apps challenge events and Bloomberg’s Data for Good Exchange. 
 
## Design & Scope a Successful Project
Scoping a project can be a esoteric endeavor. In the case of this Fellow’s experience, the general scope (traffic data exploration) was determined by both the Fellow’s background and the fact that Microsoft was teaming up with DataKind for a one-year Vision Zero data science initiative. Although such a scope was provided at the offset and framed the Fellow’s time at Microsoft, further specificity is naturally necessary in order to craft a project that is actionable and achievable within the time frame of the Fellowship. An excellent resource to that end was BetaNYC, the local Code for America brigade in New York. Hacknights occur a few times a month, typically at Civic Hall and are announced both on Civic Hall’s event page and on BetaNYC’s Meetup page. BetaNYC does have some technically inclined members working on complex, longer term projects, most of which are listed on their projects page. These projects are linked through a civic.json file, which includes metadata about project needs and purpose. More about civic.json can be found here. When looking for ongoing projects in civic technology, consider also searching Github for civic.json files. Here is an example URL endpoint for such a query.  
In addition to tapping into ongoing projects at the local Code for America brigade, this Fellow also went tapped social networks present from graduate school and his professional career. By regularly attending industry events within his topic field (transportation planning and engineering), he was able to introduce others that would potentially be interested in his work. By containing all of the work on one centralized Github group, he was able to direct others to that leading to presentations to and project following by professionals at organizations such as the MTA, Cambridge Systematics, and Transit Center.   
In the case of this Fellow, he worked independently and led the development of and design of the database as well as structuring and production of the core tools codebase solo. This is all visible on the Github group, which does include other BetaNYC members. Database structure and code base based off of and inspired by previous work done by a very technically adept, longtime member of BetaNYC, who had been working with MTA OBA Bus time API tools for years. In terms of advice for future Fellows, this Fellow found great utility in exploring and researching the work of seasoned professionals in the transportation engineering field, as well as the Code for America brigade. In fact, it was the exploratory work done by these professionals and enthusiasts that created the core groundwork for this Fellow to move quickly from the exploratory phase to the execution phase during his Fellowship.  
As with much code written at this early stage and scale, observing what the field/space has to offer and then observing already identified points of need is a quick method to identifying immediate points of need, allowing scope of execution to be quickly and efficiently ascertained. Such a situation is effective in siloing demands such that a single developer can enter and begin executing on those needs almost immediately. Where Microsoft becomes a unique asset is its ability to bring resources to projects that otherwise might have been constrained by, for example, volunteers’ personal time or financial limitations that prohibit exploration of (again, as an example) Azure platform services.  
   
## Using Microsoft Resources
A substantial credit allocation to a Microsoft Azure account specifically for this purpose has been instrumental in making this Fellow’s work possible. Future research based on this Fellow’s work and on the currently developed skeleton framework he has designed is made possible through this linked account. In order to get this allocation, the Fellow first used a BizSpark account, which was provisioned for him by the directors in New York. This allowed him to explore the base tools offered by Azure as well as to realize that some of the “big data” tools and operations scale he was looking to execute at needed resources beyond those provided on the BizSpark accounts. Communication of these needs to the directors in New York enabled the Fellow to create an account provisioned with a more substantial allotment of Azure credits, good for one year. These credits will support this project beyond the period of this Fellow’s tenure.  
This Fellow’s project utilizes fully open source software, and is deployed on a series of virtual machines running on Azure’s cloud network. All VMs are currently running Ubuntu (all Linux distributions supported by Microsoft Azure are spelled out here), allowing this framework to be service platform agnostic. It is worth noting that many in the industry (other than those intimately familiar with project deployment) tend to be unaware (again, from this Fellow’s interactions, experiences) of Microsoft Azure’s ability to support such OS projects (read: not everything has to be .NET!). Specifically, most have assumed Azure was focused solely on service of Microsoft’s proprietary web platform and cloud service toolkits (e.g. App Service - which, by the way, happens to support a variety of languages).  
When this Fellow began his time at Microsoft he was made aware of internal resources that might be of value to other users (Lynda, for example). This Fellow, given the focus on open source tools and running operations through cloud-based Azure virtual machines, found the SDKs developed and maintained by Microsoft to be of the utmost utility. To that end Microsoft has two fantastic resources that publish great work. First is the company Github group. This group (as well as the following) is extremely active and both entertaining just to follow and monitor, as well as to discover great and useful tools. Second is the Azure Github group. This Microsoft group builds and maintains all the open source SDKs for interfacing with the myriad of Azure services, and provisions all of these services in a number of languages. For example, this Fellow has used the Azure Node SDK extensively. Documentation is exceptional for most of these projects and the issues pages for each are well monitored. Bugs have been well-documented and interactions with the various repositories was - in this Fellow’s experience as well as what he was able to observe from reading and monitoring a number of projects there - characterized by responsiveness and technically competent/knowledgeable team members very familiar with the code Further documentation for navigating the various Azure web portals for resource management can be found via the Microsoft Developer Center which itself can be a mixed bag. Be careful when using those resources to check against the publishing date as well as to just sanity check your code against outstanding or otherwise documented issues on popular QA resources, such as Stack Overflow if the Developer Center guidelines fail you.  
  
## Outlining Deadlines
This Fellow’s project has had an aggressive time frame. Creating constraints on final deliverables has been key to maintaining the possibility of completing a final deliverable. Using Github has been vital to attracting outside attention to the project, particularly professionals working in the thematic space in which this work has occurred.  
